# Additional Rules

Whilst the rules we have presented in this supplement are all players need to run their own tournaments and gaming weekends, this doesn't mean they are the only rules that can be used in such events. In fact, 'many tournaments will use their own additional rules to add extra flavour to their events to make them that little bit more unique. Over the next few pages we are going to present you with a selection of additional rules that Tournament Organisers can 'make use of when putting together their own events. The Tournament Organiser may decide to implement one or more of these additional rules at their own events. Some events may like to reward those players that gain an impressive victory, more than those who simply managed to eke out a win by the narrowest of margins. To allow for this, 'Tournament Organisers may choose to use Major and Minor victories to further separate the players in the rankings. If a player achieves double or more Victory Points than their opponent, and scores at least 6 Victory Points, they will achieve a Major Victory whilst their opponent will receive a Major Loss. If a player wins their game, but doesn't score double or more Victory Points than their opponent, or does not score more than 6 Victory Points, they will earn a Minor Victory whilst their opponent will receive a Minor Loss. For example: In a tournament, Jay beats Rob by 12 Victory Points to 4. As Jay has scored at least double the number of Victory Points as Rob and at least 6 Victory Points, Jay achieves a Major Victory whilst Rob receives a Major Loss. On the next table, Keith beats Becky by 2 Victory Points tol. Even though Keith has scored double Becky's Victory Points, he has not scored the minimum of 6 Victory Points required for a Major Victory and therefore earns a Minor Victory. On the last table, Dan beats Gavin by 6 Victory Points to 5, and so Dan earns a Minor Victory as he didn't score double or more Victory Points than Gavin, who therefore receives a Minor Loss. If a tournament uses this system, then it should change the 'Tournament Points scored as provided on page 56 to the following: Major Victory 6 Tournament Points Minor Victory STournament Points Draw 2Tournament Points Minor Loss 1Tournament Point Major Loss 0 Tournament Points If aTournament Organiser wishes, they may choose to change the order of the Tiebreakers listed on page 7 to better suit the theme of their event. They may even choose to add in additional Tiebreakers for their own event. However, 'whatever the Tournament Organiser decides to use as their 'liebreakers should be made clear to all players before the start of the event. Below are some additional ideas for Tiebreakers that can be used if a Tournament Organiser wishes: - Favourite Game votes. - Number of Secret Objectives achieved (see page 59). - Number of games where your General (or the Leader in Doubles events) has survived. - Number of Major Victories. - Favourite Army votes. 'The style of event that is being run will often dictate the 'Tiebreakers used. In a more competitive Matched Play environment, Tournament Organisers will often stick to the main Tiebreakers laid out on page 7 maybe with others added afterwards if needed. However, in more relaxed events, Tiebreakers such as Favourite Game votes or Favourite Army votes are more likely to be used to fit the more relaxed nature of the event.

## Escalation Events

Some events like to use what is known as an Escalation format for the armies that the players will use. What this means is that players will start with a small Army, then add more and more to their Army following each game - though they cannot remove anything from their Army after it has been added in. 'This means that players' armies will evolve from game to game, providing a fresh challenge each round for all the players at the event. For example: In a two-day event, players may start off with 500 points for the first two games, then increase to 600 points for the second two games. On the second day they play the first two games at 750 points, before playing the final game at 1,000 points. 'There are a couple of things that are important to remember when running these Escalation style events. Firstly, at the start of the event players will need to submit all of their Army Lists for all of the points levels they will be playing. Secondly, the Tournament Organiser will need to make sure that they have taken the increasing points levels into account when deciding on how long to run each round for. Ap Ditionual Rules

### Secret Objectives

One extra rule that can be a lot of fun at events is the use of Secret Objectives. These are a selection of additional missions that players can choose from at the start of a round, and will try to achieve during their game without revealing them to their opponent. Often, events that use these Secret Objectives will use them as the first Tiebreaker, so they are rather important when in use! 'There are a total of 12 different Secret Objectives that can be used (provided over the following pages). At the start of the game, each player should select three of the Secret Objectives to put forward on separate pieces of paper 'without making them known to their opponent. Their opponent will then roll a D3 to determine which of the three will then be used during the game. Once a Secret Objective has been selected to be used ina game, it then cannot be put forward again for the remainder of the event. Players should write down the Secret Objective they are trying to achieve on a piece of paper and place it at the edge of the board. They should also submit which Secret Objective they've used, and whether they were successful in achieving it, to the Tournament Organiser at the end of the game. It is important to note that not all Secret Objectives will be achievable in every game. For example, if your opponent has no Monster models in their Army, then you won't be able to score the Bring them Down! Secret Objective as there will be no Monster models to kill.

### Bring Them Down!

Have all Monster models in your opponent's Army be removed as a casualty by the end of the game. Kill more enemy models with shooting attacks than your opponent by the end of the game. Have your General kill the enemy General in Combat. Your General must cause every Wound to the enemy General to score this Secret Objective. Have all enemy models that can cast Magical Powers be removed as a casualty by the end of the game. Have the most expensive Hero model (include wargear in their points cost) in your opponent's force be removed as a casualty. If the most expensive Hero is part of two Hero models bought together (e.g., Shank & Wrot, Orc Scavengers), then both must have been removed as a casualty to score this Secret Objective. Control any piece of woodland terrain on the board at the end of the game. To control a terrain piece, you need at least three friendly models wholly within the terrain piece and no enemy models wholly within that terrain piece.

Have at least 75% of your starting number still alive at the end of the game. Control any building on the board at the end of the game. To control abuilding, you need at least three friendly models wholly within or on the building and no enemy models 'wholly within or on that building. Have the cheapest Hero model in your force alive at the end of the game. Have at least twice as many models wholly within 6" of the centre of the board than your opponent at the end of the game. Ap Ditional Rul Have any Hero model in your force kill at least 10 enemy models over the course of the game. Have your General survive the game having suffered no Wounds and spent no Fate points.

Mmoovel showcase I hroughout his time playing The Middle-earth Strategy Battle Game, David has been a fan of Azog's Hunters, and has gathered together a rather large rabble of Hunter Orcs to take the battle to his opponents on the tabletop! Though David is willing to take on all comers, he is happiest when his opponent's force contains those from the line of Durin... Warband 1(Leader) | Army List: Azog's Hunters Points Hero | Azog the Defller (General) 175 6 | Hunter Orc Warrlors a8 6 | Hunter Orc Warrlors with Orc bow 54 4 | Hunter Orc Warrlors with two-handed weapon 36 17 | Total Models Total Points | 313 Warband 2 Army List: Azog's Hunters Hero | Bolg, Spawn of Azog on Fell Warg with Orc Bow | 200 8 | Hunter Orc Warrlors 64 6 | Fell Wargs 48 15 | Total Models Total Points | 312 Warband 3 Army List: Azog's Hunters Points Hero | Fimbul, Hunter Orc Captain on Fell Warg 70 4 | Hunter Orc Warg Riders 60 3 | Hunter Orc Warg Riders with Orc bow a8 2 | Hunter Orc Warg Riders with two-handed weapon| 32 10 | Total Models Total Points | 210 Warband 4 Army List: Azog's Hunters Points Hero | Narzug, Hunter Orc Captaln 55 12| Hunter Orc Warriors with Orc bow 108 13 | Total Models Total Points | 163 Total Models | Break Point Total Polnts 275 18 | 998 No. of Bows Points Due to Azog being a Hero of Legend, he will automatically become David's General, but there are few who could do the job better. Not only does his 'General of the North' special rule increase the range of his Stand Fast to 12", other friendly Orc Hero models that are in range also benefit. 'T'his means that should David's Army be Broken, Azog will likely be able to keep his forces in the fight. That being said, anyone who wishes to reduce David's rather formidable Army to its Break Point has a lengthy task ahead of them!

David's next warband is led by Bolg, Spawn of Azog. Much like his sire, Bolg is a fearsome warrior who is able to cut abloody swathe through the enemy with his two-handed weapon - especially from the back of a Fell Warg. His 'warband has been packed out with more Hunter Orc Warriors, as well as some fast-moving Fell Wargs. Fimbul leads David's contingent of cavalry from the back of his own Fell Warg. This Warband provides David with a fast- moving element that can strike out at far-flung Obji or envelop the enemy's flanks to eliminate spear-supports or threaten models carrying banners - who can be vital for tives, Mmoovel showcnse David's fourth and final Warband is a contingent of Hunter Orc Warriors led by Narzug. The entire Warband is armed with Orc Bows, allowing David to threaten his opponent's army from afar, rather than being forced to rely on the strategy of engaging head-on. Sometimes a tournament will call for players to b: both a Good and Evil force. When that is the David's go-to Army is his Thorin's Company - a thematic counterpart to his Azog's Hunters!
