# MONSTERS

There are all manner of different creatures that reside across Middle-earth, all of them varying in size, strength, ferocity and even allegiance. Some such creatures, like the swift Great Eagles of the Misty Mountains, are noble beasts that trouble themselves little with the goings-on of the world, whilst others are vicious, bloodthirsty creatures that stalk dark places or are bred solely for the purpose of war. Regardless, these mighty beings can all be described as monsters, and the presence of one or more on the battlefield can shift the tide of a battle in one fell swoop. Generally speaking, Monster models follow the same rules as all other models in the game. However, because Monster models are so powerful, there are a few special rules that set them apart from the standard Infantry and Cavalry models within the game - all of which we will cover here.

### MONSTERS AND CAVALRY

Cavalry models will still gain the Extra Attack bonuses when they Charge against Monster models - so long as the Monster also has the Infantry keyword. Cavalry models will still get the bonus for a lance when Charging against a Monster. A Monster that has a rider is also a Mount. In these situations, when a model hits a Monster that is also a Cavalry model with a Shooting Attack, when it makes the In The Way Test to see if it hits the rider or the Mount, a roll of a 1-4 will hit the Mount, whilst a roll of a 5+ will hit the rider.

### MONSTERS IN COMBAT (74)

Monster models excel in a fight, and are often able to cause significant damage to enemy lines and even smash right through them. Whenever a Monster model makes a Strike against an enemy model that it is Engaged in Combat with and slays them, they may immediately make a single additional Strike against each model that was Supporting the slain model. This cannot be used if the Monster model kills an enemy with a Brutal Power Attack, only when they make a Strike. Monsters and Cavalry Monsters in Combat

***Example 74: This Mordor Troll has won***

the Combat against the Warriors of Minas Tirith. It makes its first Strike against Warrior A, killing it. It then makes its second Strike against Warrior B, killing them as well. As Warrior C was Supporting Warrior B, the Troll may now make a free Strike against Warrior C; however, it doesn't kill them in this instance. As that was a free Strike, the Troll still has one remaining and chooses to Strike Warrior D, killing them as well. As Warrior E was Supporting Warrior D, the Troll may now make a free Strike against them as well, and this time the Troll successfully kills its victim!

***Example 75: The Goblin King has beaten***

Thorin in a Combat, and has elected to use the Rend Brutal Power Attack. The Goblin King will make three To Wound Rolls (as his Attacks characteristic is 3) against Thorin, though instead of using Thorin's Defence of 7 the Goblin King will compare his Strength of 5 with Thorin's Strength of 4. Looking at the To Wound Chart, these To Wound Rolls will succeed on a 4+ - Thorin is in serious trouble! Brutal Power Attacks

### BRUTAL POWER ATTACKS

If a Monster wins a Combat, its controlling player may decide for the Monster to not make Strikes and instead use a Brutal Power Attack. There are three Brutal Power Attacks that can be used by any Monster, though some may have their own unique ones in their profile. It's worth pointing out that Brutal Power Attacks are not Strikes, and therefore are not affected by any special rules, Heroic Actions or other rules that will affect a model's Strikes (e.g., Heroic Strength, a model being Trapped, a Morgul blade, Venom, etc.). Monster models that are Supporting cannot make Brutal Power Attacks. A Monster model can only ever make a single Brutal Power Attack per turn, and should a Monster wish to use a Brutal Power Attack then it must do so before any other models in the Combat resolve any Strikes. In the situation where there are multiple Monster models on the same side in the same Combat, and both wish to use a Brutal Power Attack, then the order in which these are resolved is chosen by their controlling player. However, there may be situations where as a result of a Brutal Power Attack, the other Monster will find themselves unable to use one of their own - these situations will be described where relevant.

### REND (75)

When a Monster uses this Brutal Power Attack, they must nominate one enemy model involved in the Combat to Rend (if this is a Cavalry model, you must choose either the rider or the Mount). The Monster makes a number of To Wound Rolls equal to its Attacks characteristic (including any modifiers to its Attacks) against the nominated model. When resolving these To Wound Rolls, use the nominated model's Strength characteristic instead of their Defence when using the To Wound Chart.

### BARGE

When a Monster wishes to use this Brutal Power Attack, enemy models do not Back Away as normal. Instead, all enemy models involved in the Combat, plus any enemy models that were Supporting, must Back Away 3" rather than 1". The order and direction that these models Back Away is chosen by the Monster model's controlling player. Models may still Make Way for losing models (which will be decided by the Monster model's controlling player) and, if they do, must Make Way 3" rather than the usual 1", in a direction chosen by the Monster model's controlling player. Any models that cannot Back Away or Make Way the full 3" are moved as far as possible and then knocked Prone. When doing this, if it is possible for a Monster to choose a direction for a model to Back Away or Make Way so that it goes the full 3", then it must choose that direction - it can't force a model to Back Away or Make Way less than 3" and be knocked Prone if there was a way for it to Back Away the full 3". Once a Monster model has used a Barge, the Combat immediately ends and no further Strikes or Brutal Power Attacks can be made. Once all models have Backed Away, the Monster that made the Barge can then Move D3+3" in any direction, following all the usual rules for Moving a model. It can even Charge again if it wishes, in which case it will fight again that Fight Phase in the ordinary way - i.e., in an order chosen by the player with Priority. A Monster cannot Barge in the same turn in which it participates in a Heroic Combat.

### HURL (76)

When a Monster wishes to use this Brutal Power Attack, it must nominate a single enemy model involved in the Combat before models Back Away - this is the model that will be Hurled. A Monster cannot nominate a model to be Hurled that has a Strength equal to or higher than their own. Then, all other enemy models (not the nominated model) Back Away as normal. The Monster will then Hurl the nominated model. To Hurl a model, follow the steps below: The Monster rolls a D3 and adds the difference in Strength between the Monster and the nominated model - this is the Hurl Distance. The Monster must then take an Intelligence Test (if the Monster is also a Mount, it may use the Intelligence of its rider if it is better). If the test is passed, the Monster chooses an enemy model it can draw Line of Sight to, and within the Hurl Distance from itself, to Hurl the nominated model at - this is the target. A model can only be chosen as the target of a Hurl once per turn. If the test was failed, the opposing player may choose one of their models in Line of Sight of the Monster, and within the Hurl Distance, to be the target instead. The Hurled model suffers two Strength 6 hits (if it is a Cavalry model then both rider and Mount will suffer these hits), and if it was a Cavalry model then it is also Knocked Flying. If it is slain, skip the next step and move straight to step 6. If it survives, place it in base contact with the target model as close to the Monster as possible. If this is not possible, place the model in base contact with the target as close to the position it should have been in as possible. If there is nowhere to place the model in base contact with the target, move other models the minimum distance to make this possible. The Hurled model is then knocked Prone. The target model is then knocked Prone, if it has a Strength of 5 or less, and will suffer one Strength 6 hit (if it is a Cavalry model then both rider and Mount will suffer these hits). If it is a Cavalry model then it is also Knocked Flying. If there are no enemy models eligible to be the target, then the Monster may choose a point on the battlefield it can draw Line of Sight within the Hurl Distance instead. Place the Hurled model on the chosen point; it is then knocked Prone and suffers two Strength 6 hits. Once a Monster model has used a Hurl, the Combat immediately ends and no further Strikes or Brutal Power Attacks can be made. A Monster cannot Hurl in the same turn in which it participates in a Heroic Combat.

***Example 76: Beorn has won a Combat***

against the Gundabad Orc and elects to Hurl them. He rolls a D3 and scores a 4 - a D3 result of a 2. Beorn has a Strength of 8, whilst the Gundabad Orc has a Strength of 4 - a difference of 4. This means that the Hurl Distance is 6"; 2 for the D3 roll, plus 4 for the difference in Strength. Beorn then chooses an enemy model within the Hurl Distance to throw the Orc at, and selects Azog. The Hurled model suffers two Strength 6 hits, which they luckily survive in this instance. The Hurled model is then placed in base contact with Azog, as close to the Monster as possible. As there is another Orc in this position, the Hurled model is placed slightly further around Azog's base as shown in the diagram, and is then knocked Prone. Azog is then also knocked Prone and suffers one Strength 6 hit, which also wounds the Pale Orc in this instance.
